Document pod `status.observedGeneration` (#51371)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/_index.md

- Most of the metadata about a Pod is immutable. For example, you cannot
  change the `namespace`, `name`, `uid`, or `creationTimestamp` fields.

- If the `metadata.deletionTimestamp` is set, no new entry can be added to the
  `metadata.finalizers` list.
- Pod updates may not change fields other than `spec.containers[*].image`,

>   `spec.initContainers[*].image`, `spec.activeDeadlineSeconds`, `spec.terminationGracePeriodSeconds` or

Reviewer: scheduling gates is also missing

- Most of the metadata about a Pod is immutable. For example, you cannot
  change the `namespace`, `name`, `uid`, or `creationTimestamp` fields.

- If the `metadata.deletionTimestamp` is set, no new entry can be added to the
  `metadata.finalizers` list.
- Pod updates may not change fields other than `spec.containers[*].image`,

>   `spec.initContainers[*].image`, `spec.activeDeadlineSeconds`, `spec.terminationGracePeriodSeconds` or

Reviewer 2: @jonathancecilj , please take a look at @SergeyKanzhelev 's suggestion

- **Binding:** The `binding` subresource allows setting the pod's `spec.nodeName` via a `Binding` request.
  This is typically only used by the {{< glossary_tooltip text="scheduler" term_id="kube-scheduler" >}}.

### Pod generation

> - The `generation` field is unique. It will be automatically set by the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The `metadata.generation` field is unique. It will be automatically set by the
```

Previously this was in a section that was talking about metadata, but since we are moving it to its own section, we should make it expicit

  system such that new pods have a `metadata.generation` of 1, and every update to
  mutable fields in the pod's spec will increment the `metadata.generation` by 1.

  {{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.34" state="beta" >}}

> - `observedGeneration` is an optional field that is captured in the `status` section of the Pod

Reviewer 3: nit: remove the word "optional". Optional usually implies that it is optional for the user, but in this case the field is set by the system (and is always set when the feature gate is on)

```suggestion
- `observedGeneration` is a field that is captured in the `status` section of the Pod
```

>   object. Kubelet will set `status.observedGeneration` to track the pod state to the current pod status.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  object. If the feature gate `PodObservedGenerationTracking` is set, the Kubelet will set `status.observedGeneration` to track the pod state to the current pod status.
```

  The pod's `status.observedGeneration` will reflect the `metadata.generation` of the pod at the point
  that the pod status is being reported.

> 

Reviewer 3: I think this is a great high-level description of what generation / observedGeneration is, thank you!

Just one thing I want us to add here. https://github.com/kubernetes/website/issues/51195 states that we have to carefully document the nuanced meaning of observedGeneration. That "nuance" I think is captured well in summary section of the [mutable fields analysis doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-4CR2NmDJotCM13YQyr8OEeGIczlc3WFmV1BhdUrWcw/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.sgpvrzc5uc7x):

> If allocated spec is reflected directly in the pod status, it makes sense for the observed generation to be the generation observed in the current sync loop. This is the case for: allocated resources, resize status, ephemeral containers.
> If the status is an indirect result of running the spec, then the generation associated is the generation from the previous sync loop. This is the case for: actual resources, container image, activeDeadlineSeconds/terminationGracePeriodSeconds 

Can we add something to this effect here?

Author: As part of v1 iteration added details fom the doc.

- **Binding:** The `binding` subresource allows setting the pod's `spec.nodeName` via a `Binding` request.
  This is typically only used by the {{< glossary_tooltip text="scheduler" term_id="kube-scheduler" >}}.

### Pod generation

- The `metadata.generation` field is unique. It will be automatically set by the
  system such that new pods have a `metadata.generation` of 1, and every update to
  mutable fields in the pod's spec will increment the `metadata.generation` by 1.

>   {{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.34" state="beta" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< feature-state feature_gate_name="PodObservedGenerationTracking" >}}
```

> {{< feature-state feature_gate_name="PodObservedGenerationTracking" >}}

Reviewer 4: should we add a note to say that k8s is not expecting external controllers to modify this field in any ways and changing it may lead to unexpected behavior?

- `observedGeneration` is a field that is captured in the `status` section of the Pod
  object. If the feature gate `PodObservedGenerationTracking` is set, the Kubelet will set `status.observedGeneration`
  to track the pod state to the current pod status. The pod's `status.observedGeneration` will reflect the
  `metadata.generation` of the pod at the point that the pod status is being reported.

Different status fields may either be associated with the `metadata.generation` of the current sync loop, or with the
`metadata.generation` of the previous sync loop. The key distinction is whether a change in the `spec` is reflected
directly in the `status` or is an indirect result of a running process.

> 

Reviewer 4: can we add two notices - one for the fact that this does not apply to static pods. And one that node lifecycle controller may set this as well?

Reviewer 3: The node lifecycle controller does not touch `status.observedGeneration`. It only touches pod `conditions[].observedGeneration` which does not apply to this documentation.

If we want to make it a requirement to document more carefully `conditions[].observedGeneration`, let's leave it out of scope of this PR. I'll take it up as a separate task.

Reviewer 4: sure. Makes sense

#### Direct Status Updates

For status fields where the allocated spec is directly reflected, the `observedGeneration` will
be associated with the current `metadata.generation` (Generation N).

This behavior applies to:

- **Resize Status**: The status of a resource resize operation.
- **Allocated Resources**: The resources allocated to the Pod after a resize.
- **Ephemeral Containers**: When a new ephemeral container is added, and it is in `Waiting` state.

#### Indirect Status Updates

For status fields that are an indirect result of running the spec, the `observedGeneration` will be associated
with the `metadata.generation` of the previous sync loop (Generation N-1).

This behavior applies to:

- **Container Image**: The `ContainerStatus.ImageID` reflects the image from the previous generation until the new image
  is pulled and the container is updated.
- **Actual Resources**: During an in-progress resize, the actual resources in use still belong to the previous generation's
  request.
- **Container state**: During an in-progress resize, with require restart policy reflects the previous generation's
  request.

> - **activeDeadlineSeconds** & **terminationGracePeriodSeconds** & **DeletionTimestamp**: The effects of these fields on the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **activeDeadlineSeconds** & **terminationGracePeriodSeconds** & **deletionTimestamp**: The effects of these fields on the
```
